docs(book): revisit the multithreading page (#688)
future-proof-iot/RIOT-rs: book/src/multithreading.md

# Multithreading

Ariel OS supports multithreading on the Cortex-M, RISC-V, and Xtensa architectures, and is compatible with async executors.

**Important:**
When an application requires multithreading, it must enable it by [selecting the `sw/threading` laze module][laze-modules-book], which enables the `threading` Cargo feature.

## Spawning Threads

> Threads can either be created using the [`#[ariel_os::thread]` attribute macro][thread-attr-macro-rustdoc], which creates and starts the thread during startup, or spawned dynamically at runtime. In the latter case, the thread stack must still be statically allocated at compile time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The recommended way of starting threads is by using the [`#[ariel_os::thread]` attribute macro][thread-attr-macro-rustdoc], which creates and starts the thread during startup.
Threads can also be spawned dynamically at runtime. In this case, the thread stack must still be statically allocated at compile time.
```

> The maximum number of concurrent threads is defined by the [`THREAD_COUNT`][max-thread-count-rustdoc] constant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The maximum number of threads is defined by the [`THREAD_COUNT`][max-thread-count-rustdoc] constant.
```

> This value limits the number of *concurrently* running threads, but it is possible to create a higher number of threads during the application lifetime if earlier ones have finished their execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I find this confusing.

## Scheduling

### Priority Scheduling

Ariel OS features a preemptive scheduler, which supports priority scheduling with up to 32 priority levels.
The highest priority runnable thread (or threads in the multicore case) is always executed.
Threads having the same priority are scheduled cooperatively.
The scheduler itself is tickless, therefore time-slicing isn't supported.
Thread priorities are dynamic and can be changed at runtime using [`thread::set_priority()`][set-priority-rustdoc].

### Idling

On single core, no idle threads are created.
Instead, if no threads are to be scheduled, the processor enters sleep mode until a thread is ready.

> The context of the previously running thread is only saved once the next thread is ready and the context switch occurs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

just drop, this is an implementation detail

On multicore, one idle thread is created for each core.
When the idle thread is scheduled, it prompts the current core to enter sleep mode.

## Multicore Support

> Ariel OS currently supports symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) on the following MCUs:

Reviewer: Move section above "Idling"?

  - ESP32-S3
  - RP2040

When the `sw/threading` laze module is selected and when available on the MCU, the `multi-core` laze module automatically gets selected, which enables SMP.
To disable multicore, [disable the `multi-core` laze module][laze-modules-book].

> Porting single-core applications to support multicore requires no changes to them.

> ### Priority Scheduling

Reviewer: There are two "priority scheduling" sections. Maybe merge?

# Multithreading

Ariel OS supports multithreading on the Cortex-M, RISC-V, and Xtensa architectures, and is compatible with async executors.

**Important:**
When an application requires multithreading, it must enable it by [selecting the `sw/threading` laze module][laze-modules-book], which enables the `threading` Cargo feature.

## Spawning Threads

Threads can either be created using the [`#[ariel_os::thread]` attribute macro][thread-attr-macro-rustdoc], which creates and starts the thread during startup, or spawned dynamically at runtime. In the latter case, the thread stack must still be statically allocated at compile time.

The maximum number of concurrent threads is defined by the [`THREAD_COUNT`][max-thread-count-rustdoc] constant.
This value limits the number of *concurrently* running threads, but it is possible to create a higher number of threads during the application lifetime if earlier ones have finished their execution.

<!-- TODO: revisit when writing the async chapter -->

> <!-- Multiple asynchronous tasks can be spawned within each thread with an executor from the integrated [Embassy] crate. This bridges the gap with async Rust, future-based concurrency, and asynchronous I/O. The executor executes all its tasks inside the thread context. When all tasks on the executor are pending, the owning thread is suspended. -->

Reviewer: yeah, if we touch this, we can remove the comments. then later, write an example & docs for "start more executors in threads".
